<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Palace of Aklis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Palace of Aklis</h2>
			<p>Now, Shibli Bagarag assured himself of his three spells, and made his heart resolute, and hastened up the reddened marble steps of the Palace; and when he was on the topmost step, lo! one with a man’s body and the head of a buffalo, that prostrated himself, and prayed the youth obsequiously to enter the palace with the title of King. So Shibli Bagarag held his head erect, and followed him with the footing of a Sultan, and passed into a great hall, with fountains in it that were fountains of gems, pearls, chrysolites, thousand-hued jewels, and by the margin of the fountains were shapes of men with the heads of beasts-wolves, foxes, lions, bears, oxen, sheep, serpents, asses, that stretched their hands to the falls, and loaded their vestments with brilliants, loading them without cessation, so that from the vestments of each there was another pouring of the liquid lights. Then he with the buffalo’s head bade Shibli Bagarag help himself from the falls; but Shibli Bagarag refused, for his soul was with Noorna, his betrothed; and he saw her pale on that solitary pillar in the tumult of the sea, and knew her safety depended on his faithfulness.</p>
			<p>He cried, “The Sword of Aklis! nought save the Sword!”</p>
			<p>Now, at these words the fox-heads and the sheep-heads and the ass-heads and the other heads of beasts were lifted up, and lo! they put their hands to their ears, and tapped their foreheads with the finger of reflection, as creatures seeking to bring to mind a serious matter. Then the fountains rose higher, and flung jets of radiant jewels, and a drenching spray of gems upon them, and new thirst aroused them to renew their gulping of the falls, and a look of eagerness was even in the eyes of the ass-heads and the silly sheep-heads; surely, Shibli Bagarag laughed to see them! Now, when he had pressed his lips to recover his sight from the dazzling of those wondrous fountains, he heard himself again addressed by the title of King, and there was before him a lofty cock with a man’s head. So he resumed the majesty of his march, and followed the fine-stepping cock into another hall, spacious, and clouded with heavy scents and perfumes burning in censers and urns, musk, myrrh, ambergris, and livelier odours, gladdening the nostril like wine, making the soul reel as with a draught of the forbidden drink. Here, before a feast that would prick the dead with appetite, were shapes of beasts with heads of men, asses, elephants, bulls, horses, swine, foxes, river-horses, dromedaries; and they ate and drank as do the famished with munch and gurgle, clacking their lips joyfully. Shibli Bagarag remembered the condition of his frame when first he looked upon the City of Shagpat, and was incited to eat and accede to the invitation of the cock with the man’s head, and sit among these merry feeders and pickers of mouth-watering morsels, when, with the City of Shagpat, lo! he had a vision of Shagpat, hairier than at their interview, arrogant in hairiness; his head remote in contemptuous waves and curls and frizzes, and bushy protuberances of hair, lost in it, like an idolatrous temple in impenetrable thickets. Then the yearning of the Barber seized Shibli Bagarag, and desire to shear Shagpat was as a mighty overwhelming wave in his bosom, and he shouted, “The Sword of Aklis! nought save the Sword!”</p>
			<p>Now, at these words the beasts with men’s heads wagged their tails, all of them, from right to left, and kept their jaws from motion, staring stupidly at the dishes; but the dishes began to send forth stealthy steams, insidious whispers to the nose, silver intimations of savouriness, so that they on a sudden set up a howl, and Shibli Bagarag puckered his garments from them as from devouring dogs, and hastened from that hall to a third, where at the entrance a damsel stood that smiled to him, and led him into a vast marbled chamber, forty cubits high, hung with draperies, and in it a hundred doors; and he was in the midst of a very rose-garden of young beauties, such as the Blest behold in Paradise, robed in the colours of the rising and setting sun; plump, with long, black, languishing, almond-shaped eyes, and undulating figures. So they cried to him, “What greeting, O our King?”</p>
			<p>Now, he counted twenty and seven of them, and, fitting his gallantry to verse, answered:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Poor are the heavens that have not ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swell their glowing plenty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up there but one bright moon I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here mark I seven-and-twenty.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The damsels laughed and flung back their locks at his flattery, sporting with him; and he thought, “These be sweet maidens! I will know if they be illusions like Rabesqurat”; so, as they were romping, he slung his right arm round one, and held the Lily to her, but there was no change in her save that she winked somewhat and her eyes watered; and it was so with the others, for when they saw him hold the Lily to one they made him do so to them likewise. Then he took the phial, and touched their lips with the waters, and lo! they commenced luting and laughing, and singing verses, and prattling, laughing betweenwhiles at each other; and one, a noisy one, with long, black, unquiet tresses, and a curved foot and roguish ankle, sang as she twirled:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“My heart is another’s, I cannot be tender;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if thou storm it, I fain must surrender.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And another, a fresh-cheeked, fair-haired, full-eyed damsel, strong upon her instep and stately in the bearing of her shoulders, sang shrilly:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“I’m of the mountains, and he that comes to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like eagle must win, and like hurricane woo me.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And another, reclining on a couch buried in dusky silks, like a butterfly under the leaves, a soft ball of beauty, sang moaningly:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Here like a fruit on the branch am I swaying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatch ere I fall, love! there’s death in delaying.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And another, light as an antelope on the hills, with antelope eyes edged with kohl, and timid, graceful movements, and small, white, rounded ears, sang clearly:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Swiftness is mine, and I fly from the sordid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow me, follow! and you’ll be rewarded.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And another, with large limbs and massive mould, that stepped like a cow leisurely cropping the pasture, and shook with jewels amid her black hair and above her brown eyes, and round her white neck and her wrists, and on her waist, even to her ankle, sang as with a kiss upon every word:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Sweet ’tis in stillness and bliss to be basking!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who would have me, may have for the asking.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And another, with eyebrows like a bow, and arrows of fire in her eyes, and two rosebuds her full moist parted pouting lips, sang, clasping her hands, and voiced like the tremulous passionate bulbul in the shadows of the moon:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Love is my life, and with love I live only;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me life, lover, and leave me not lonely.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And a seventh, a very beam of beauty, and the perfection of all that is imagined in fairness and ample grace of expression and proportion, lo! she came straight to Shibli Bagarag, and took him by the hand and pierced him with lightning glances, singing:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Were we not destined to meet by one planet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can a fate sever us?⁠—can it, ah! can it?”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And she sang tender songs to him, mazing him with blandishments, so that the aim of existence and the summit of ambition now seemed to him the life of a king in that palace among the damsels; and he thought, “Wah! these be no illusions, and they speak the thing that is in them. <i xml:lang="ar">Wullahy</i>, loveliness is their portion; they call me King.”</p>
			<p>Then she that had sung to him said, “Surely we have been waiting thee long to crown thee our King! Thou hast been in some way delayed, O glorious one!”</p>
			<p>And he answered, “O fair ones, transcending in affability, I have stumbled upon obstructions in my journey hither, and I have met with adventures, but of this crowning that was to follow them I knew nought. <i xml:lang="ar">Wullahy</i>, thrice have I been saluted King; I whom fate selecteth for the shaving of Shagpat, and till now it was a beguilement, all emptiness.”</p>
			<p>They marked his bewildered state, and some knelt before him, some held their arms out adoringly, some leaned to him with glistening looks, and he was fast falling a slave to their flatteries, succumbing to them; imagination fired him with the splendours due to one that was a king, and the thought of wearing a crown again took possession of his soul, and he cried, “Crown me, O my handmaidens, and delay not to crown me; for, as the poet says:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘The king without his crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath a forehead like the clown’;”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“and the circle of my head itcheth for the symbols of majesty.”</p>
			<p>At these words of Shibli Bagarag they arose quickly and clapped their hands, and danced with the nimble step of gladness, exclaiming, “O our King! pleasant will be the time with him!” And one smoothed his head and poured oil upon it; one brought him garments of gold and silk inwoven; one fetched him slippers like the sun’s beam in brightness; others stood together in clusters, and with lutes and wood-instruments, low-toned, singing odes to him; and lo! one took a needle and threaded it, and gave the thread into the hands of Shibli Bagarag, and with the point of the needle she pricked certain letters on his right wrist, and afterwards pricked the same letters on a door in the wall. Then she said to him, “Is it in thy power to make those letters speak?”</p>
			<p>He answered, “We will prove how that may be.”</p>
			<p>So he flung some drops from the phial over the letters, and they glowed the colour of blood and flashed with a report, and it was as if a fiery forked-tongue had darted before them and spake the words written, and they were, “This is the crown of him who bath achieved his aim and resteth here.” Thereupon, she stuck the needle in the door, and he pulled the thread, and the door drew apart, and lo! a small chamber, and on a raised cushion of blue satin a glittering crown, thick with jewels as a frost, such as Ambition pineth to wear, and the knees of men weaken and bend beholding, and it lanced lights about it like a living sun. Beside the cushion was a vacant throne, radiant as morning in the East, ablaze with devices in gold and gems, a seat to fill the meanest soul with sensations of majesty and tempt dervishes to the sitting posture. Shibli Bagarag was intoxicated at the sight, and he thought, “Wah! but if I sit on this throne and am a king, with that crown I can command men and things! and I have but to say, Fetch Noorna, my betrothed, from yonder pillar in the midst of the uproarious sea!⁠—Let the hairy Shagpat be shaved! and behold, slaves, thousands of them, do my bidding! <i xml:lang="ar">Wullahy</i>, this is greatness!” Now, he made a rush to the throne, but the damsels held him back, crying, “Not for thy life till we have crowned thee, our master and lord!”</p>
			<p>Then they took the crown and crowned him with it; and he sat upon the throne calmly, serenely, like a Sultan of the great race accustomed to sovereignty, tempering the awfulness of his brows with benignant glances. So, while he sat the damsels hid their faces and started some paces from him, as unable to bear the splendour of his presence, and in a moment, lo! the door closed between him and them, and he was in darkness. Then he heard a voice of the damsels cry in the hall, “The ninety and ninth! Peace now for us and blissfulness with our lords, for now all are filled save the door of the Sword, which maketh the hundredth.” After that he heard the same voice say, “Leave them, O my sisters!”</p>
			<p>So he listened to the noise of their departing, and knew he had been duped. Surely his soul cursed him as he sat crowned and throned in that darkness! He seized the crown to dash it to the earth, but the crown was fixed on his forehead and would not come off; neither had he force to rise from the throne. Now, the thought of Noorna, his betrothed, where she rested waiting for him to deliver her, filled Shibli Bagarag with the extremes of anguish; and he lifted his right arm and dashed it above his head in the violence of his grief, striking in the motion a hidden gong that gave forth a burst of thunder and a roll of bellowings, and lo! the door opened before him, and the throne as he sat on it moved out of the chamber into the hall where he had seen the damsels that duped him, and on every side of the hall doors opened; and he marvelled to see men, old and young, beardless and venerable, sitting upon thrones and crowned with crowns, motionless, with eyes like stones in the recesses. He thought, “These be other dupes! <i xml:lang="ar">Wullahy!</i> a drop of the waters of Paravid upon their lips might reveal mysteries, and guide me to the Sword of my seeking.” So, as he considered how to get at them from the seat of his throne, his gaze fell on a mirror, and he beheld the crown on his forehead what it was, bejewelled asses’ ears stiffened upright, and skulls of monkeys grinning with gems! The sight of that crowning his head convulsed Shibli Bagarag with laughter, and, as he laughed, his seat upon the throne was loosened, and he pitched from it, but the crown stuck to him and was tenacious of its hold as the lion that pounceth upon a victim. He bowed to the burden of necessity, and took the phial, and touched the lips of one that sat crowned on a throne with the waters in the phial; and it was a man of exceeding age, whitened with time, and in the long sweep of his beard like a mountain clad with snow from the peak that is in the sky to the base that slopeth to the valley. Then he addressed the old man on his throne, saying, “Tell me, O King! how camest thou here? and in search of what?”</p>
			<p>The old man’s lips moved, and he muttered in deep tones, “When cometh he of the ninety-and-ninth door?”</p>
			<p>So Shibli Bagarag cried, “Surely he is before thee, in Aklis.”</p>
			<p>And the old man said, “Let him ask no secrets; but when he hath reached the Sword forget not to flash it in this hall, for the sake of brotherhood in adventure.”</p>
			<p>After that he would answer no word to any questioning.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
