<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>And This Is the Story of Noorna Bin Noorka, the Genie Karaz, and the Princess of Oolb</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">And This Is the Story of Noorna Bin Noforka, the Genie Karaz, and the Princess of Oolb</h2>
			<p>Know, that when I was a babe, I lay on my mother’s bosom in the wilderness, and it was the bosom of death. Surely, I slept and smiled, and dreamed the infant’s dream, and knew not the coldness of the thing I touched. So were we even as two dead creatures lying there; but life was in me, and I awoke with hunger at the time of feeding, and turned to my mother, and put up my little mouth to her for nourishment, and sucked her, but nothing came. I cried, and commenced chiding her, and after a while it was as decreed, that certain horsemen of a troop passing through the wilderness beheld me, and seeing my distress and the helpless being I was, their hearts were stirred, and they were mindful of what the poet says concerning succour given to the poor, helpless, and innocent of this world, and took me up, and mixed for me camel’s milk and water from the bags, and comforted me, and bore me with them, after they had paid funeral rites to the body of my mother.</p>
			<p>Now, the rosebud showeth if the rose-tree be of the wilds or of the garden, and the chief of that troop seeing me born to the uses of gentleness, carried me in his arms with him to his wife, and persuaded her that was childless to make me the child of their adoption. So I abode with them during the period of infancy and childhood, caressed and cared for, as is said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“The flower a stranger’s hand may gather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes root into the stranger’s breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affection is our mother, father,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Friend, and of cherishers the best.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And I loved them as their own child, witting not but that I was their child, till on a day while I played among some children of my years, the daughter of the King of Oolb passed by us on a mule, with her slaves and drawn swords, and called to me, “Thou little castaway!” and had me brought to her, and peered upon my face in a manner that frightened me, for I was young. Then she put me down from the neck of her mule where she had seated me, saying, “Child of a dead mother and a runaway father, what need I fear from thy like, and the dreams of a lovesick Genie?” So she departed, but I forgot not her words, and dwelt upon them, and grew fevered with them, and drooped. Now, when he saw my bloom of health gone, heaviness on my feet, the light hollowed from my eyes, my benefactor, Ravaloke⁠—he that I had thought my father⁠—took me between his knees, and asked me what it was and the cause of my ailing; and I told him.</p>
			<p>Then said he, “This is so: thou art not my child; but I love thee as mine, O my little Desert-flower; and why the Princess should fancy fear of thee I like not to think; but fear thou her, for she is a mask of wiles and a vine trailing over pitfalls; such a sorceress the world knoweth not as Goorelka of Oolb.”</p>
			<p>Now, I was penetrated by what he said, and ceased to be a companion to them that loved childish games and romps, and meditated by myself in gardens and closets, feigning sleep when the elder ones discoursed, that I might learn something of this mystery, and all that was spoken perplexed me more, as the sage declareth:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Who in a labyrinth wandereth without clue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More that he wandereth doth himself undo.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Though I was quick as the quick-eyed falcon, I discovered nought, flying ever at false game⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“A follower of misleading beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cheated soul, the mock of dreams.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>At times I thought that it was the King of Oolb was my father, and plotted to come in his path; and there were kings and princes of far countries whom I sought to encounter, that they might claim me; but none claimed me. O my betrothed, few gave me love beside Ravaloke, and when the wife that he cherished died, he solely, for I was lost in waywardness and the slave of moody imaginings. ’Tis said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“If thou the love of the world for thyself wouldst gain, mould thy breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Liker the world to become, for its like the world loveth best;”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>and this was not I then.</p>
			<p>Now, the sons and daughters of men are used to celebrate the days of their birth with gifts and rejoicings, but I could only celebrate that day which delivered me from death into the hands of Ravaloke, as none knew my birth-hour. When it was the twelfth return of this event, Ravaloke, my heart’s father, called me to him and pressed in my hand a glittering coin, telling me to buy with it in the bazaars what I would. So I went forth, attended by a black slave, after the mid-noon, for I was eager to expend my store, and cared not for the great heat. Scarcely had we passed the cheese-market and were hurrying on to shops of the goldsmiths and jewellers, when I saw an old man, a beggar, in a dirty yellow turban and pieced particoloured cloth-stuff, and linen in rags his other gear. So lean was he, and looked so weak that I wondered he did other than lay his length on the ground; and as he asked me for alms his voice had a piteousness that made me to weep, and I punished my slave for seeking to drive him away, and gave my one piece of gold into his hand. Then he asked me what I required of him in exchange, and I said, “What can a poor old man that is a beggar give?” He laughed, and asked me then what I had intended to buy with that piece of money. So, beginning to regret the power that was gone from me of commanding with my gold piece this and that fine thing, I mused, and said, “Truly, a blue dress embroidered with gold, and a gold crown, and gold bracelets set with turquoise stones⁠—these, and toys; but could I buy in this city a book of magic, that were my purchase.”</p>
			<p>The old fellow smiled, and said to my black slave, “And thou, hadst thou this coin, what were thy purchase therewith?”</p>
			<p>He, scoffing the old beggar, answered, “A plaister for sores as broad as my back, and a camel’s hump, O thou old villain!”</p>
			<p>The old man grunted in his chest, and said, “Thou art but a camel thyself, to hinder a true Mussulman from passing in peace down a street of Oolb; so ’twere a good purchase and a fitting: know’st thou what is said of the blessing given by them that receive a charity?</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘ ’Tis the fertilizing dew that streameth after the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong as the breath of Allah to bless life well begun.’</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“So is my blessing on the little damsel, and she shall have her wish, wullahy, thou black face! and thou thine.”</p>
			<p>This spake the old man, and hobbled off while my slave was jeering him. So I strolled through the bazaars and thought no more of the old man’s words, and longed to purchase a hundred fineries, and came to the confectioner’s, and smelt the smell of his musk-scented sweetmeats and lemon sweets and sugared pistachios that are delicious to crunch between the teeth. My mouth watered, and I said to my slave, “O Kadrab, a coin, though ’twere small, would give us privilege in yonder shop to select, and feast, and approve the skill of the confectioner.”</p>
			<p>He grinned, and displayed in his black fist a petty coin of exchange, but would not let me have it till I had sworn to give no more away to beggars. So even as we were hurrying into the shop, another old beggar wretcheder than the first fronted me, and I was moved, and forgot my promise to Kadrab, and gave him the money. Then was Kadrab wroth, and kicked the old beggar with his forefoot, lifting him high in air, and lo! he did not alight, but rose over the roofs of the houses and beyond the city, till he was but a speck in the blue of the sky above. So Kadrab bit his forefinger amazed, and glanced at his foot, and at what was visible of the old beggarman, and again at his foot, thinking but of what he had done with it, and the might manifested in that kick, fool that he was! All the way homeward he kept scanning the sky and lifting his foot aloft, and I saw him bewildered with a strange conceit, as the poet has exclaimed in his scorn:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, world diseased! oh, race empirical!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where fools are the fathers of every miracle!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now, when I was in my chamber, what saw I there but a dress of very costly blue raiment with gold-work broidery and a lovely circlet of gold, and gold bracelets set with stones of turquoise, and a basket of gold woven wire, wherein were toys, wondrous ones⁠—soldiers that cut off each other’s heads and put them on again, springing antelopes, palm-trees that turned to fountains, and others; and lo! a book in red binding, with figures on it and clasps of gold, a great book! So I clapped my hands joyfully, crying, “The old beggar has done it!” and robed myself in the dress, and ran forth to tell Ravaloke. As I ran by a window looking on the inner court, I saw below a crowd of all the slaves of Ravaloke round one that was seeking to escape from them, and ’twas Kadrab with a camel’s hump on his back, and a broad brown plaister over it, the wretch howling, peering across his shoulder, and trying to bolt from his burden, as a horse that would run from his rider. Then I saw that Kadrab also had his wish, his camel’s hump, and thought, “The old beggar, what was he but a Genie?” Surely Ravaloke caressed me when he heard of the adventure, and what had befallen Kadrab was the jest of the city; but for me I spared little time away from that book, and studied in it incessantly the ways and windings of magic, till I could hold communication with Genii, and wield charms to summon them, and utter spells that subdue them, discovering the haunts of talismans that enthral Afrites and are powerful among men. There was that Kadrab coming to me daily to call out in the air for the old beggarman to rid him of his hump; and he would waste hours looking up into the sky moodily for him, and cursing the five toes of his foot, for he doubted not the two beggars were one, and that he was punished for the kick, and lamented it direly, saying in the thick of his whimperings, “I’d give the foot that did it to be released from my hump, O my fair mistress.” So I pitied him, and made a powder and a spell, and my first experiment in magic was to relieve Kadrab of his hump, and I succeeded in loosening it, and it came away from him, and sank into the ground of the garden where we stood. So I told Kadrab to say nothing of this, but the idle-pated fellow blabbed it over the city, and it came to the ears of Goorelka. Then she sent for me to visit her, and by the advice of Ravaloke I went, and she fondled me, and sought to get at the depth of my knowledge by a spell that tieth every faculty save the tongue, and it is the spell of vain longing. Now, because I baffled her arts she knew me more cunning than I seemed, and as night advanced she affected to be possessed with pleasure in me, and took me in her arms and sought to fascinate me, and I heard her mutter once, “Shall I doubt the warning of Karaz?” So presently she said, “Come with me’; and I went with her under the curtain of that apartment into another, a long saloon, wherein were couches round a fountain, and beyond it an aviary lit with lamps: when we were there she whistled, and immediately there was a concert of birds, a wondrous accord of exquisite piping, and she leaned on a couch and took me by her to listen; sweet and passionate was the harmony of the birds; but I let not my faculties lull, and observed that round the throat of every bird was a ringed mark of gold and stamps of divers gems similar in colour to a ring on the forefinger of her right hand, which she dazzled my sight with as she flashed it. When we had listened a long hour to this music, the Princess gazed on me as if to mark the effect of a charm, and I saw disappointment on her lovely face, and she bit her lip and looked spiteful, saying, “Thou art far gone in the use of magic, and wary, O girl!” Then she laughed unnaturally, and called slaves to bring in sweet drinks to us, and I drank with her, and became less wary, and she fondled me more, calling me tender names, heaping endearments on me; and as the hour of the middle-night approached I was losing all suspicion in deep languor, and sighed at the song of the birds, the long love-song, and dozed awake with eyes half shut. I felt her steal from me, and continued still motionless without alarm: so was I mastered. What hour it was or what time had passed I cannot say, when a bird that was chained on a perch before me⁠—a very quaint bird, with a topknot awry, and black, heavy bill, and ragged gorgeousness of plumage⁠—the only object between my lids and darkness, suddenly, in the midst of the singing, let loose a hoarse laugh that was followed by peals of laughter from the other birds. Thereat I started up, and beheld the Princess standing over a brazier, and she seized a slipper from her foot and flung it at the bird that had first laughed, and struck him off his perch, and went to him and seized him and shook him, crying, “Dare to laugh again!” and he kept clearing his throat and trying to catch the tune he had lost, pitching a high note and a low note; but the marvel of this laughter of the bird wakened me thoroughly, and I thanked the bird in my soul, and said to Goorelka, “More wondrous than their singing, this laughter, O Princess!”</p>
			<p>She would not speak till she had beaten every bird in the aviary, and then said in the words of the poet:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Shall they that deal in magic match degrees of wonder?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the bosom of one cloud comes the lightning and the thunder.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Then said she, “O Noorna! I’ll tell thee truly my intent, which was to enchant thee; but I find thee wise, so let us join our powers, and thou shah become mighty as a sorceress.”</p>
			<p>Now, Ravaloke had said to me, “Her friendship is fire, her enmity frost; so be cold to the former, to the latter hot,” and I dissembled and replied, “Teach me, O Princess!”</p>
			<p>So she asked me what I could do. Could I plant a mountain in the sea and people it? could I anchor a purple cloud under the sun and live there a year with them I delighted in? could I fix the eyes of the world upon one head and make the nations bow to it; change men to birds, fishes to men; and so on⁠—a hundred sorceries that I had never attempted and dreamed not of my betrothed! I had never offended Allah by a misuse of my powers. When I told her, she cried, “Thou art then of a surety she that’s fitted for the custody of the Lily of the Light, so come with me.”</p>
			<p>Now, I had heard of the Lily, even this thou holdest may its influence be unwithering!⁠—and desired to see it. So she led me from the palace to the shore of the sea, and flung a cockleshell on the waters, and seated herself in it with me in her lap; and we scudded over the waters, and entered this Enchanted Sea, and stood by the Lily. Then, I that loved flowers undertook the custody of this one, knowing not the consequences and the depth of her wiles. ’Tis truly said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“The overwise themselves hoodwink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For simple eyesight is a modest thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They on the black abysm’s brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smile, and but when they fall bitterly think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What difference ’twixt the fool and me, Creation’s King?”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Nevertheless for awhile nothing evil resulted, and I had great joy in the flower, and tended it with exceeding watchfulness, and loved it, so that I was brought in my heart to thank the Princess and think well of her.</p>
			<p>Now, one summer eve as Ravaloke rested under the shade of his garden palm, and I studied beside him great volumes of magic, it happened that after I had read certain pages I closed one of the books marked on the cover “Alif,” and shut the clasp louder than I intended, so that he who was dozing started up, and his head was in the sloped sun in an instant, and I observed the shadow of his head lengthen out along the grass-plot towards the mossed wall, and it shot up the wall, darkening it⁠—then drawing back and lessening, then darting forth like a beast of darkness irritable for prey. I was troubled, for whatso is seen while the volume Alif is in use hath a portent; but the discovery of what this might be baffled me. So I determined to watch events, and it was not many days ere Ravaloke, who was the leader of the armies of the King of Oolb, was called forth to subdue certain revolted tributaries of the King, and at my entreaty took me with him, and I saw battles and encounters lasting a day’s length. Once we were encamped in a fruitful country by a brook running with a bright eye between green banks, and I that had freedom and the password of the camp wandered down to it, and refreshed my forehead with its coolness. So, as I looked under the falling drops, lo! on the opposite bank the old beggar that had given me such fair return for my alms and Kadrab his hump! I heard him call, “This night is the key to the mystery,” and he was gone. Every incantation I uttered was insufficient to bring him back. Surely, I hurried to the tents and took no sleep, watching zealously by the tent of Ravaloke, crouched in its shadow. About the time of the setting of the moon I heard footsteps approach the tent within the circle of the guard, and it was a youth that held in his hand naked steel. When he was by the threshold of the tent, I rose before him and beheld the favourite of Ravaloke, even the youth he had destined to espouse me; so I reproached him, and he wept, denying not the intention he had to assassinate Ravaloke, and when his soul was softened he confessed to me, “ ’Twas that I might win the Princess Goorelka, and she urged me to it, promising the King would promote me to the vacant post of Ravaloke.”</p>
			<p>Then I said to him, “Lov’st thou Goorelka?”</p>
			<p>And he answered, “Yea, though I know my doom in loving her; and that it will be the doom of them now piping to her pleasure and denied the privilege of laughter.”</p>
			<p>So I thought, “Oh, cruel sorceress! the birds are men!” And as I mused, my breast melted with pity at their desire to laugh, and the little restraint they had upon themselves notwithstanding her harshness; for could they think of their changed condition and folly without laughter? and the folly that sent them fresh mates in misery was indeed matter for laughter, fed to fulness by constant meditation on the perch. Meantime, I uncharmed the youth and bade him retire quickly; but as he was going, he said, “Beware of the Genie Karaz!” Then I held him back, and after a parley he told me what he had heard the Princess say, and it was that Karaz had seen me and sworn to possess me for my beauty. “Strangely smiled Goorelka when she spake that,” said he.</p>
			<p>Now, the City of Oolb fronts the sea, and behind it is a mountain and a wood, where the King met Ravaloke on his return victorious over the rebels. So, to escape the eye of the King I parted with Ravaloke, and sought to enter the city by a circuitous way; but the paths wound about and zigzagged, and my slaves suffered nightfall to surprise us in the entanglements of the wood. I sent them in different directions to strike into the main path, retaining Kadrab at the bridle of my mule; but that creature now began to address me in a familiar tone, and he said something of love for me that enraged me, so that I hit him a blow. Then came from him sounds like the neighing of mares, and lo! he seized me and rose with me in the air, and I thought the very heavens were opening to that black beast, when on a sudden he paused, and shot down with me from heights of the stars to the mouth of a cavern by the Putrid Sea, and dragged me into a cavern greatly illuminated, hung like a palace chamber, and supported on pillars of shining jasper. Then I fell upon the floor in a swoon, and awaking saw Kadrab no longer, but in his place a Genie. O my soul, thou halt seen him!⁠—I thought at once, “ ’tis Karaz!” and when he said to me, “This is thy abode, O lady! and I he that have sworn to possess thee from the hour I saw thee in the chamber of Goorelka,” then was I certain ’twas Karaz. So, collecting the strength of my soul, I said, in the words of the poet:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Woo not a heart preoccupied!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thorn is like a loathing bride?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark ye the shrubs how they turn from the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea’s rough whispers shun?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like the sun of heaven be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every flower will open wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woo with the shining patience we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld in heaven’s sun.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Then he sang:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Exquisite lady! name the smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fills thy heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the foot and I the worm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prescribe the Term.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Finding him compliant, I said, “O great Genie, truly the search of my life has been to discover him that is, my father, and how I was left in the wilderness. There’s no peace for me, nor understanding the word of love, till I hear by whom I was left a babe on the bosom of a dead mother.”</p>
			<p>He exclaimed, and his eyes twinkled, “ ’Tis that? that shalt thou know in a span of time. O my mistress, hast thou seen the birds of Goorelka? Thy father Feshnavat is among them, perched like a bird.”</p>
			<p>So I cried, “And tell me how he may be disenchanted.”</p>
			<p>He said, “Swear first to be mine unreluctantly.”</p>
			<p>Then I said, “What is thy oath?”</p>
			<p>He answered, “I swear, when I swear, by the Identical.”</p>
			<p>Thereupon I questioned him concerning the Identical, what it was; and he, not suspecting, revealed to me the mighty hair in his head now in the head of Shagpat, even that. So I swore by that to give myself to the possessor of the Identical, and flattered him. Then said he, “O lovely damsel, I am truly one of the most powerful of the Genii; yet am I in bondage to that sorceress Goorelka by reason of a ring she holdeth; and could I get that ring from her and be slave to nothing mortal an hour, I could light creation as a torch, and broil the inhabitants of earth at one fire.”</p>
			<p>I thought, “That ring is known to me!” And he continued, “Surely I cannot assist thee in this work other than by revealing the means of disenchantment, and it is to keep the birds laughing uninterruptedly an hour; then are they men again, and take the forms of men that are laughers⁠—I know not why.”</p>
			<p>So I cried, “ ’Tis well! carry me back to Oolb.”</p>
			<p>Then the Genie lifted me into the air, and ceased not speeding rapidly through it, till I was on the roof of the house of Ravaloke. O sweet youth! moon of my soul! from that time to the disenchantment of Feshnavat, I pored over my books, trying experiments in magic, dreadful ones, hunting for talismans to countervail Goorelka; but her power was great, and ’twas not in me to get her away from the birds one hour to free them. On a certain occasion I had stolen to them, and kept them laughing with stories of man to within an instant of the hour; and they were laughing exultingly with the easy happy laugh of them that perceive deliverance sure, when she burst in and beat them even to the door of death. I saw too in her eyes, that glowed like the eyes of wild cats in the dark, she suspected me, and I called Allah to aid the just cause against the sinful, and prepared to war with her.</p>
			<p>Now, my desire, which was to liberate my father and his fellows in tribulation, I knew pure, and had no fear of the sequel, as is declared:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Fear nought so much as Fear itself; for arm’d with Fear the Foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finds passage to the vital part, and strikes a double blow.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>So one day as I leaned from my casement looking on the garden seaward, I saw a strange red and yellow-feathered bird that flew to the branch of a citron-tree opposite, with a ring in its beak; and the bird was singing, and with every note the ring dropped from its bill, and it descended swiftly in an arrowy slant downward, and seized it ere it reached the ground, and commenced singing afresh. When I had marked this to happen many times, I thought, “How like is this bird to an innocent soul possessed of magic and using its powers! Lo, it seeketh still to sing as one of the careless, and cannot relinquish the ring and be as the careless, and between the two there is neither peace for it nor pleasure.” Now, while my eyes were on the pretty bird, dwelling on it, I saw it struck suddenly by an arrow beneath the left wing, and the bird fluttered to my bosom and dropped in it the ring from its beak. Then it sprang weakly, and sought to fly and soar, and fluttered; but a blue film lodged over its eyes, and its panting was quickly ended. So I looked at the ring and knew it for that one I had noted on the finger of Goorelka. Red blushed my bliss, and ’twas revealed to me that the bird was of the birds of the Princess that had escaped from her with the ring. I buried the bird, weeping for it, and flew to my books, and as I read a glow stole over me. O my betrothed, eyes of my soul! I read that the possessor of that ring was mistress of the marvellous hair which is a magnet to the homage of men, so that they crowd and crush and hunger to adore it, even the Identical! This was the power that peopled the aviary of Goorelka, and had well-nigh conquered all the resistance of my craft.</p>
			<p>Now, while I read there arose a hubbub and noise in the outer court, and shrieks of slaves. The noise approached with rapid strides, and before I could close my books Goorelka burst in upon me, crying, “Noorna! Noorna!” Wild and haggard was her head, and she rushed to my books and saw them open at the sign of the ring: then began our combat. She menaced me as never mortal was menaced. Rapid lightning-flashes were her transformations, and she was a serpent, a scorpion, a lizard, a lioness in succession, but I leapt perpetually into fresh rings of fire and of witched water; and at the fiftieth transformation, she fell on the floor exhausted, a shuddering heap. Seeing that, I ran from her to the aviary in her palace, and hurried over a story of men to the birds, that rocked them on their perches with chestquakes of irresistible laughter. Then flew I back to the Princess, and she still puffing on the floor, commenced wheedling and begging the ring of me, stinting no promises. At last she cried, “Girl! what is this ring to thee without beauty? Thy beauty is in my keeping.”</p>
			<p>And I exclaimed, “How? how?” smitten to the soul.</p>
			<p>She answered, “Yea; and I can wear it as my own, adding it to my own, when thou’rt a hag!”</p>
			<p>My betrothed! I was on the verge of giving her the ring for this secret, when a violent remote laughter filled the inner hollow of my ears, and it increased, till the Princess heard it; and now the light of my casement was darkened with birds, the birds of Goorelka, laughing as on a wind of laughter. So I opened to them, and they darted in, laughing all of them, till I could hold out no longer, and the infection of laughter seized me, and I rolled with it; and the Princess, she too laughed a hyaena-laugh under a cat’s grin, and we all of us remained in this wise some minutes, laughing the breath out of our bodies, as if death would take us. Whoso in the City of Oolb heard us, the slaves, the people, and the King, laughed, knowing not the cause. This day is still remembered in Oolb as the day of laughter. Now, at a stroke of the hour the laughter ceased, and I saw in the chamber a crowd of youths and elders of various ranks; but their visages were become long and solemn as that of them that have seen a dark experience. ’Tis certain they laughed little in their lives from that time, and the muscles of their cheeks had rest. So I caught down my veil, and cried to the Princess, “My father is among these; point him out to me.”</p>
			<p>Ere she replied one stepped forth, even Feshnavat, my father, and called me by name, and knew me by a spot on the left arm, and made himself known to me, and told me the story of my dead mother, how she had missed her way from the caravan in the desert, and he searching her was set upon by robbers, and borne on their expeditions. Nothing said he of the sorceries of Goorelka, and I, not wishing to provoke the Princess, suffered his dread to exist. So I kissed him, and bowed my head to him, and she fled from the sight of innocent happiness. Then took I the ring, and summoned Karaz, and ordered him to reinstate all those princes and chiefs and officers in their possessions and powers, on what part of earth soever that might be. Never till I stood as the Lily and thy voice sweetened the name of love in my ears, heard I aught of delicate delightfulness, like the sound of their gratitude. Many wooed me to let them stay by me and guard me, and do service all their lives to me; but this I would not allow, and though they were fair as moons, some of them, I responded not to their soft glances, speaking calmly the word of farewell, for I was burdened with other thoughts.</p>
			<p>Now, when the Genie had done my bidding, he returned to me joyfully. My soul sickened to think myself his by a promise; but I revolved the words of my promise, and saw in them a loophole of escape. So, when he claimed me, I said, “Ay! ay! lay thy head in my lap,” as if my mind treasured it. Then he lay there, and revealed to me his plans for the destruction of men. “Or,” said he, “they shall be our slaves and burden-beasts, for there’s now no restraint on me, now thou art mistress of the ring, and mine.” Thereupon his imagination swelled, and he saw his evil will enthroned, and the hopes of men beneath his heel, crying, “And the more I crush them the thicker they crowd, for the Identical compelleth their very souls to adore in spite of distaste.”</p>
			<p>Then said I, “Tell me, O Genie! is the Identical subservient to me in another head save thine?”</p>
			<p>He answered, “Nay I in another head ’tis a counteraction to the power of the Ring, the Ring powerless over it.”</p>
			<p>And I said, “Must it live in a head, the Identical?”</p>
			<p>Cried he, “Woe to what else holdeth it!”</p>
			<p>I whispered in his hairy pointed red ear, “Sleep! sleep!” and lulled him with a song, and he slept, being weary with my commissioning. Then I bade Feshnavat, my father, fetch me one of my books of magic, and read in it of the discovery of the Identical by means of the Ring; and I took the Ring and hung it on a hair of my own head over the head of the Genie, and saw one of the thin lengths begin to twist and dart and writhe, and shift lustres as a creature in anguish. So I put the Ring on my forefinger, and turned the hair round and round it, and tugged. Lo, with a noise that stunned me, the hair came out! O my betrothed, what shrieks and roars were those: with which the Genie awoke, finding himself bare of the Identical! Oolb heard them, and the sea foamed like the mouth of madness, as the Genie sped thunder-like over it, following me in midair. Such a flight was that! Now, I found it not possible to hold the Identical, for it twisted and stung, and was nigh slipping from me while I flew. I saw white on a corner of the Desert, a city, and I descended on it by the shop of a clothier that sat quietly by his goods and stuffs, thinking of fate less than of kabobs and stews and rare seasonings. That city hath now his name. Wullahy, had I not then sown in his head that hair which he weareth yet, how had I escaped Karaz, and met thee? Wondrous are the decrees of Providence! Praise be to Allah for them! So the Genie, when he found himself baffled by me, and Shagpat with the mighty hair in his head, the Identical, he yelled, and fetched Shagpat a slap that sent him into the middle of the street; but Kadza screamed after him, and there was immediately such lamentation in the city about Shagpat, and such tearing of hair about him, that I perceived at once the virtue that was in the Identical. As for Karaz, finding his claim as possessor of the Identical no more valid, he vanished, and has been my rebellious slave since, till thou, O my betrothed, mad’st me spend him in curing thy folly on the horse Garraveen, and he escaped from my circles beyond the dominion of the Ring; yet had he his revenge, for I that was keeper of the Lily, had, I now learned ruefully, a bond of beauty with it, and whatever was a stain to one withered the other. Then that sorceress Goorelka stole my beauty from me by sprinkling a blight on the petals of the fair flower, and I became as thou first saw’st me. But what am I as I now am? Blissful! blissful! Surely I grew humble with the loss of beauty, and by humility wise, so that I assisted Feshnavat to become Vizier by the Ring, and watched for thy coming to shave Shagpat, as a star watcheth; for ’tis written, “A barber alone shall be shearer of the Identical’; and he only, my betrothed, hath power to plant it in Aklis, where it groweth as a pillar, bringing due reverence to Aklis.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
